Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home and a cheerful disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her.

She was the youngest of two daughters of a most affectionate and indulgent father; and had, in consequence of her sister's marriage, been mistress of his house from a very early period. Her mother had died too long ago for her to have more than a vague remembrance of her caresses; and her place had been supplied by an excellent governess, who had fallen a little short of a mother’s affection.

Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Woodhouse's family, less as a governess than as a friend, very fond of both daughters, but particularly of Emma. Between them, the intimacy was more like that of sisters. Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess, the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint; and the shadow of authority, long past, had led them to live together as friends, very mutually attached, and Emma doing exactly what she liked; although she highly esteemed Miss Taylor's judgment, she was chiefly guided by her own.

The real evils, indeed, of Emma's situation were the power of having too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little too well of herself; these were the disadvantages which threatened to tarnish her many pleasures. The danger, however, was so unperceived at the time, that she did not at all consider it a misfortune.

Sorrow came—a gentle sorrow—but not in the form of any unpleasant consciousness. Miss Taylor married. It was the loss of Miss Taylor that brought the first pain. It was the wedding day of this dear friend that Emma first fell into a melancholy thought of any length. The wedding over, and the bride and groom gone, her father and she were left to dine together, with no prospect of a third person to enliven a long evening. Her father took his customary nap after dinner, and she had only to sit and think over what she had lost.

The event promised every happiness to her friend. Mr. Weston was a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, and pleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in considering with what generous and unselfish friendship she had always desired and promoted the match; but for herself it was a black morning's work. The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day. She recalled her past kindness—the kindness, the affection of sixteen years—how she had taught and played with her from five years old—how she had devoted all her energy to attach and amuse her when she was well—and how she had nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood. There was here a great debt of gratitude; but the intercourse of the last seven years, the equality and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella's marriage, on their being left to themselves, was an even dearer and more tender memory. She had been a friend and companion such as few people possessed: clever, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing all the family's customs, interested in all their concerns, and peculiarly interested in herself, in every pleasure, in every plan of her own—someone to whom she could speak every thought as it arose, and who had such an affection for her that she could never find fault with her.

How was she to bear the change? It was true that her friend was going to live only half a mile from them; but Emma was conscious that there must be a great difference between a Mrs. Weston, only half a mile from them, and a Miss Taylor in the house; and with all her advantages, natural and domestic, she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual loneliness. She was very fond of her father, but he was no companion for her. He could not keep up with her in conversation, either in the rational or the playful.

The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and Mr. Woodhouse had not married early) was much more increased by his constitution and habits; for having been a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mind or body, he was a much older man in his ways than in his years; and though loved by everyone for the kindness of his heart and his gentle temper, his talents would not have recommended him at any time.

Her sister, though comparatively little removed by marriage, having settled in London, only sixteen miles away, was much beyond her daily reach; and many long October and November evenings would she have to get through at Hartfield, before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband, and their little children, to fill the house and give her a pleasant society again.

Highbury, the large and populous village, almost a town, to which Hartfield, despite its separate lawn, its gardens, and its name, really belonged, offered her no equals. The Woodhouses were the most important people there. Everyone looked up to them with respect. She had many acquaintances in the place, because her father was universally polite, but not a single one of them could be accepted in place of Miss Taylor for even half a day. It was a melancholy change; and Emma could not help sighing over it, and wishing for impossible things, until her father woke, and made it necessary for her to be cheerful. His state of mind required support. He was a nervous man, easily depressed; attached to all people he was used to, and hated to part with them; hated change of every kind. Marriage, as the origin of change, was always unpleasant; and he had not yet reconciled himself to his own daughter's marriage, nor could he speak of her but with compassion, even though it had been a marriage entirely for love, when he was now forced to part with Miss Taylor too; and from his habits of gentle selfishness, and of being unable to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself, he was very ready to think that Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them, and that she would have been much happier if she had spent the rest of her life at Hartfield. Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could, to turn him from such thoughts; but when the time for tea came, it was impossible for him not to say exactly what he had said at dinner:

“Poor Miss Taylor! I wish she were here again. What a pity Mr. Weston ever thought of her!”

“I cannot agree with you, Papa; you know I cannot. Mr. Weston is such a good-humored, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves a good wife; and would you have had Miss Taylor live with us forever, and bear all my strange moods, when she could have a house of her own?”

“A house of her own! But what is the advantage of a house of her own? This is three times as large. And you never have strange moods, my dear.”

“How often we shall go and see them, and they will come and see us! We shall be always meeting! We must begin; we must go and pay them the wedding visit very soon.”

“My dear, how am I to get so far? Randalls is such a distance. I could not walk half so far.”

“No, Papa, nobody thought of your walking. We must go in the carriage, of course.”

“The carriage! But James will not like putting the horses to for such a short way; and where will the poor horses be while we are visiting?”

“They will be in Mr. Weston's stable, Papa. You know we have arranged all that. We talked it all over with Mr. Weston last night. And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like to go to Randalls, because his daughter is the housemaid there. I only doubt whether he will take us anywhere else. That was your doing, Papa. You got Hannah that good place. Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentioned her; James is so much obliged to you!”

“I am very glad I did think of her. It was very lucky, for I would not have had poor James feel slighted for the world; and I am sure she will be a very good servant: she is a civil, well-spoken girl; I have a great opinion of her. Whenever I see her, she always makes me a curtsey, and asks me how I do, in a very pretty manner; and when you have had her here to sew, I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way, and never bangs it. I am sure she will be an excellent servant; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have someone about her that she is used to seeing. Whenever James goes to see his daughter, you know, she will be hearing of us. He will be able to tell her how we all are.”

Emma spared no efforts to keep up this happier train of ideas, and hoped, with the help of backgammon, to get through the evening with her father tolerably, and not be attacked by any regrets but her own. The backgammon board was placed; but a visitor came in immediately after and made it unnecessary.

Mr. Knightley, a sensible man of about seven or eight and thirty, was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family, but was particularly connected with it, as the elder brother of Isabella's husband. He lived at about a mile from Highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome, and at this time more welcome than usual, as he came directly from their mutual connections in London. He had returned to a late dinner, after a few days' absence, and now walked over to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square. It was a happy circumstance, and cheered Mr. Woodhouse for some time. Mr. Knightley had a cheerful air that always did him good; and his many inquiries about “poor Isabella” and her children were answered very satisfactorily. When this was over, Mr. Woodhouse observed with gratitude, “It is very kind of you, Mr. Knightley, to come out at this late hour to visit us. I am afraid you must have had a shocking walk.”

“Not at all, sir. It is a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild that I must get away from your great fire.”

“But you must have found it very damp and dirty. I wish you may not get a cold.”

“Dirty, sir! Look at my shoes. Not a speck.”

“Well! that is quite surprising, for we have had a great deal of rain here. It rained terribly hard for half an hour while we were at breakfast. I wished them to put off the wedding.”

“By the bye, I have not wished you joy. Being quite aware what sort of joy you both must be feeling, I have not been in a hurry with my congratulations; but I hope everything went off tolerably. How did you all behave? Who cried most?”

“Ah! Poor Miss Taylor! It is a sad business.”

“Poor Mr. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot say ‘poor Miss Taylor.’ I have a great regard for you and Emma; but when it comes to the question of dependence or independence… At any rate, it must be better to have only one to please than two.

“Especially when one of those two is such a whimsical, troublesome creature!” said Emma playfully. “That is what you have in your head, I know, and what you would certainly say if my father were not here.”

“I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed,” said Mr. Woodhouse, with a sigh. “I am afraid I am sometimes very whimsical and troublesome.”

“My dearest Papa! You do not think I could mean you, or suppose Mr. Knightley could mean you. What a horrible idea! Oh, no! I meant only myself. Mr. Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know, in fun, it is all a joke. We always say what we like to each other.”

Mr. Knightley, in fact, was one of the few people who could see faults in Emma Woodhouse, and the only one who ever told her of them: and though this was not particularly pleasant to Emma herself, she knew it would be much less so to her father, so she did not want him to truly suspect such a circumstance as her not being considered perfect by everyone.

“Emma knows I never flatter her,” said Mr. Knightley, “but I meant no criticism of anyone. Miss Taylor has been used to pleasing two people; now she will have only one. The odds are that she will be better off.”

“Well,” said Emma, willing to let it go, “you want to know about the wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, because we all behaved charmingly. Everyone was punctual, everyone in their best looks: not a tear, and hardly a long face to be seen. Oh, no; we all felt that we were to be only half a mile apart, and were sure of meeting every day.”

“Dear Emma bears everything so well,” said her father. “But, Mr. Knightley, she really is very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor, and I am sure she will miss her more than she thinks.”

Emma turned her head, divided between tears and smiles. “It is impossible for Emma not to miss such a companion,” said Mr. Knightley. “We should not like her as well as we do, sir, if we could suppose it; but she knows how much the marriage benefits Miss Taylor; she knows how acceptable it must be, at Miss Taylor's age, to be settled in a home of her own, and how important it is for her to have a comfortable provision, and therefore she cannot allow herself to feel as much pain as pleasure. Every friend of Miss Taylor's must be glad that she has married so happily.”

“And you have forgotten one motive for joy to me,” said Emma, “and a very considerable one: that I myself made the match. I made the match, you know, four years ago; and the fact that it came to pass, and proved me right, when so many people said Mr. Weston would never marry again, may comfort me for anything.”

Mr. Knightley shook his head at her. Her father replied fondly, “Ah! my dear, I wish you would not make matches and predict things, because whatever you say always comes true. Please, do not make any more matches.”

“I promise you I will not make any for myself, Papa; but I must, indeed, for other people. It is the greatest fun in the world! And after such success, you know! Everybody said Mr. Weston would never marry again. Oh, no! Mr. Weston, who had been a widower for so long, and who seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupied either in his business in town or among his friends here, always accepted wherever he went, always cheerful. Mr. Weston did not need to spend a single night of the year alone if he did not like it. Oh, no! Mr. Weston would certainly never marry again. Some people even talked of a deathbed promise to his wife, and others of the son and the uncle who would not let him. All sorts of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject, but I did not believe any of it.

“From the day—about four years ago—that Miss Taylor and I met him in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to drizzle, he so gallantly went off and borrowed two umbrellas for us from Farmer Mitchell, I made up my mind on the subject. I planned the match from that hour; and when so much success has blessed me in this instance, my dear Papa, you cannot think that I will give up matchmaking.”

“I do not understand what you mean by ‘success,’” said Mr. Knightley. “Success implies effort. Your time has been spent properly and delicately if you have been exerting yourself for the last four years to bring about this marriage. A worthy employment for a young lady’s mind! But if, which I rather imagine, your ‘making the match,’ as you call it, means only planning it, saying to yourself one idle day, ‘I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr. Weston were to marry her,’ and saying it to yourself now and then afterwards, why do you talk of success? Where is your merit? What are you proud of? You made a lucky guess; and that is all that can be said.”

“And have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess? I pity you. I thought you more clever, for, believe me, a lucky guess is never merely luck. There is always some talent in it. And as for my poor word ‘success,’ which you quarrel with, I do not know if I am so entirely without any right to it. You have painted two pretty pictures; but I think there may be a third, something between the doing-nothing and the doing-everything. If I had not promoted Mr. Weston’s visits here, and given many little encouragements, and smoothed over many little matters, it might not have come to anything after all. I think you know Hartfield enough to understand that.”

“A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational, unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely left to manage their own affairs. You are more likely to have done harm to yourself, than good to them, by your interference.”

“Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others,” replied Mr. Woodhouse, only partly understanding. “But, my dear, please do not make any more matches; they are foolish things, and they break up one’s family circle so sadly.”

“Only one more, Papa; only for Mr. Elton. Poor Mr. Elton! You like Mr. Elton, Papa, I must find a wife for him. There is nobody in Highbury who deserves him, and he has been here a whole year, and has furnished his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame for him to remain single any longer, and I thought when I was joining their hands today, he looked so as if he would like to have the same kind of favor done for him. I think very well of Mr. Elton, and this is the only way I have of doing him a service.”

“Mr. Elton is a very handsome young man, to be sure, and a very good young man, and I have a great regard for him. But if you want to show him any attention, my dear, ask him to come and dine with us someday. That will be a much better thing. I dare say Mr. Knightley will be so kind as to meet him.”

“With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time,” said Mr. Knightley, laughing, “and I quite agree with you, that it will be a much better thing. Ask him to dinner, Emma, and give him the best of the fish and chicken, but leave him to choose his own wife. Believe me, a man of twenty-six or seven can take care of himself.”